Add a guide for external network use case (#573)
submariner-io/submariner-website: src/content/getting-started/quickstart/external/_index.md

    - K8s clusters:

    | Cluster   | Node IP(s)     | Remarks             |
    |-----------|----------------|---------------------|
    | cluster-a | 192.168.122.26 | Single-node cluster |
    | cluster-b | 192.168.122.27 | Single-node cluster |

    - non-cluster host:

    | Host      | IP              | Remarks            |
    |-----------|-----------------|--------------------|
    | test-vm   | 192.168.122.142 | Linux is installed |

    In above case, all of them are deployed inside 192.168.122.0/24 segment.
    However, it is only required that cluster-a and test-vm are in the same segment.
    Other clusters, cluster-b and any additional clusters, can be deployed in different segments or even in any other networks in the internet. Also, these clusters can be multi-node cluster.

    On the other hand, subnets of non-cluster hosts should be distinguished from those of all the clusters to easily specify the external network CIDR.
    In above case, cluster-a and cluster-b belongs to 192.168.122.0/25 network and test-vm belongs to 192.168.122.128/25 network.
    Therefore, the external network CIDR for this configuration is 192.168.122.128/25.

>     In test environment for just one host, we will be able to specify external network CIDR, like 192.168.122.142/32, however design of the subnet needs to be considered when more hosts are added.

Author: For this configuration to be more flexible, it would be better to provide a separate interface for external CIDR, in the future, as @mangelajo has already pointed out [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1knqUrD5kKI0u8X7dRUf5IseYa-13BKSRtry9ulD-DDQ/edit?pli=1#bookmark=id.gr1uxfycb496).

### Set up submariner

#### Ensure kubeconfig files

Ensure that kubeconfig file for cluster-a exists as kubeconfig.cluster-a and kubeconfig file for cluster-b exists as kubeconfig.cluster-b on node of cluster-a. File names can be different, but rest of this guide assumes these files are named as such.

#### Install `subctl` on node of cluster-a

{{% subctl-install %}}

#### Use cluster-a as the Broker with globalnet enabled

On node of cluster-a, run:

```bash
subctl deploy-broker --kubeconfig kubeconfig.cluster-a  --globalnet
```

#### Join cluster-a to the Broker with external CIDR added as clustercidr

Carefully review the `CLUSTER_CIDR` and `EXTERNAL_CIDR` and run:

```bash
CLUSTER_CIDR=10.42.0.0/24
EXTERNAL_CIDR=192.168.122.128/25
subctl join --kubeconfig kubeconfig.cluster-a broker-info.subm --clusterid cluster-a --natt=false --clustercidr=${CLUSTER_CIDR},${EXTERNAL_CIDR}
```

#### Join cluster-b to the Broker

```bash
subctl join --kubeconfig kubeconfig.cluster-b broker-info.subm --clusterid cluster-b --natt=false
```

> #### Deploy dns server on cluster-a for non-cluster hosts

Author: Created a separate issue to discuss a better way for this, [here](https://github.com/submariner-io/lighthouse/issues/600).

```bash
echo "242.0.0.0/8 via ${subm_gw_ip} dev eth0" >> /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/route-eth0
```

Modify `/etc/resolv.conf` to change DNS server for the host on test-vm:

For example)

- Before:
```
nameserver 192.168.122.1
```

- After:
```
nameserver 242.0.255.251
```

Check that the DNS server itself can be resolved:

```bash
nslookup external-dns-cluster-a.submariner-operator.svc.clusterset.local
Server:         242.0.255.251
Address:        242.0.255.251#53

Name:   external-dns-cluster-a.submariner-operator.svc.clusterset.local
Address: 10.43.162.46
```

### Verify Deployment

#### Verify Manually

##### Deploy HTTP server on hosts

Run on test-vm:

- python 2.x case:
```bash
python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80
```
- python 3.x case:
```bash
python -m http.server 80
```

##### Verify access to hosts from clusters

Create Service, Endpoints, ServiceExport to access to test-vm, on cluster-a:

Note that `Endpoints.subsets.addresses` needs to be modified to IP of test-vm.

```bash
export KUBECONFIG=kubeconfig.cluster-a
cat << EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: test-vm
spec:

>   ports:

Author: Does it make sense to make it headless service, by adding `clusterIP: None`?
Then, it will be headless service without selector.

By doing so, I expect that it can provide a persistent source IP from the endpoint that is pointing to an external host.
Currently, it doesn't seem to work maybe the similar reason to this [issue](https://github.com/submariner-io/lighthouse/issues/603).

Author: Opened a separate issue https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner/issues/1537 .

    - protocol: TCP
      port: 80
      targetPort: 80
EOF

cat << EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: Endpoints
metadata:
  name: test-vm
subsets:
  - addresses:
      - ip: 192.168.122.142
    ports:
      - port: 80
EOF

subctl export service -n default test-vm
```

Check global ingress IP for test-vm, on cluster-a:
```bash
kubectl get globalingressip test-vm
NAME      IP
test-vm   242.0.255.253
```

Verify access to test-vm from clusters:

```bash
export KUBECONFIG=kubeconfig.cluster-a
kubectl -n default run tmp-shell --rm -i --tty --image quay.io/submariner/nettest -- bash

> curl 242.0.255.253

Author: Due to this [issue](https://github.com/submariner-io/lighthouse/issues/603), access from cluster to non-cluster works only via global ingress IP. It should be able to be accessed via DNS name.

---
date: 2021-08-11T12:33:18+01:00
title: "External Network (Experimental)"
weight: 15
---

This guide covers the minimum steps to try external network use case.

> In this use case, users can access between pods in clusters and applications outside clusters
> by using DNS names that lighthouse provides or globalnet ingress IPs.
> In addition, source IPs of these communications can be preserved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this use case, pods running in the K8s cluster can access external applications outside of the cluster and vice-versa by using DNS resolution supported by lighthouse or manually using the globalnet ingress IPs.
Along with connectivity, the source IP of the traffic will also be preserved.
```

> This feature is still experimental, so the behaviors and configurations may be changed in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature is still experimental, so the configuration mechanism and observed behavior may be changed in the future.
```

### Prerequisites

1. Prepare below:
    - Two or more k8s clusters

>     - One or more non-cluster hosts, that exist in the same network segment to the one of the k8s clusters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - One or more non-cluster hosts, that exist in the same network segment to one of the k8s clusters
```

    In this guide, we will use the following k8s clusters and a non-cluster host.

    - K8s clusters:

    | Cluster   | Node IP(s)     | Remarks             |
    |-----------|----------------|---------------------|
    | cluster-a | 192.168.122.26 | Single-node cluster |
    | cluster-b | 192.168.122.27 | Single-node cluster |

    - non-cluster host:

    | Host      | IP              | Remarks            |
    |-----------|-----------------|--------------------|
    | test-vm   | 192.168.122.142 | Linux is installed |

    In above case, all of them are deployed inside 192.168.122.0/24 segment.
    However, it is only required that cluster-a and test-vm are in the same segment.
    Other clusters, cluster-b and any additional clusters, can be deployed in different segments or even in any other networks in the internet.

>     Also, these clusters can be multi-node cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Also, these clusters can be multi-node clusters.
```

    On the other hand, subnets of non-cluster hosts should be distinguished from those of all the clusters
    to easily specify the external network CIDR.
    In above case, cluster-a and cluster-b belongs to 192.168.122.0/25 network and test-vm belongs to 192.168.122.128/25 network.
    Therefore, the external network CIDR for this configuration is 192.168.122.128/25.
    In test environment for just one host, we will be able to specify external network CIDR, like 192.168.122.142/32.
    However design of the subnet needs to be considered when more hosts are added.

2. Choose the Pod CIDR and the Service CIDR for k8s clusters and deply them.

    In this guide, we will use the following CIDRs:

    | Cluster   | Pod CIDR     | Service CIDR |
    |-----------|--------------|--------------|
    | cluster-a |10.42.0.0/24  |10.43.0.0/16  |
    | cluster-b |10.42.0.0/24  |10.43.0.0/16  |

>     Note that we will use globalnet in this guide, therefore overlapping CIDR is allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Note that we will use globalnet in this guide, therefore overlapping CIDRs are supported.
```

    One of the easiest way to create this environment will be to deploy two K3s clusters by the steps described
    [here](https://submariner.io/getting-started/quickstart/k3s/) until "Deploy cluster-b on node-b",
    with modifying deploy commands to just `curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | sh -` to use default CIDR.

> ### Set up submariner

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Setup Submariner
```

#### Ensure kubeconfig files

Ensure that kubeconfig file for cluster-a exists as kubeconfig.cluster-a and
kubeconfig file for cluster-b exists as kubeconfig.cluster-b on node of cluster-a.
File names can be different, but rest of this guide assumes these files are named as such.

#### Install `subctl` on node of cluster-a

{{% subctl-install %}}

> 

Author: Just to be sure, currently tested with `curl -Ls https://get.submariner.io | VERSION="devel" bash -s -`, until globalnet v2 is enabled on released version.

Reviewer: 0.10 is now released :)

        volumeMounts:
        - name: upstreamservers
          mountPath: /upstreamservers
      volumes:
        - name: upstreamservers
          configMap:
            name: external-dnsmasq
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  namespace: submariner-operator
  name: external-dns-cluster-a
spec:
  ports:
  - name: udp
    port: 53
    protocol: UDP
    targetPort: 53
  selector:
    app: external-dns-cluster-a
```

Use this yaml to create DNS server, and assign global ingress IP:

```bash
kubectl apply -f dns.yaml
subctl export service -n submariner-operator external-dns-cluster-a
```

Check global ingress IP:

```bash
kubectl --kubeconfig kubeconfig.cluster-a get globalingressip external-dns-cluster-a -n submariner-operator
NAME                     IP
external-dns-cluster-a   242.0.255.251
```

### Set up non-cluster hosts

Modify routing for global CIDR on test-vm:

Note that `subm_gw_ip` is the gateway node IP of the cluster in the same network segment of the hosts.
In the case of the example of this guide, it is the node IP of cluster-a.

```bash
subm_gw_ip=192.168.122.26

> ip r add 242.0.0.0/8 via ${subm_gw_ip}

Reviewer: Do you want to add a small note saying 242.0.0.0/8 is the default globalCIDR?

```

To persist above configuration across reboot, check the document for each Linux distribution.
For example, on Centos 7, to set presistent route for eth0, below command is required:

```bash
echo "242.0.0.0/8 via ${subm_gw_ip} dev eth0" >> /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/route-eth0
```

Modify `/etc/resolv.conf` to change DNS server for the host on test-vm:

For example)

- Before:

```bash
nameserver 192.168.122.1
```

- After:

```bash
nameserver 242.0.255.251
```

Check that the DNS server itself can be resolved:

```bash
nslookup external-dns-cluster-a.submariner-operator.svc.clusterset.local
Server:         242.0.255.251
Address:        242.0.255.251#53

Name:   external-dns-cluster-a.submariner-operator.svc.clusterset.local
Address: 10.43.162.46
```

### Verify Deployment

#### Verify Manually

##### Deploy HTTP server on hosts

Run on test-vm:

- python 2.x case:

```bash
python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80
```

- python 3.x case:

```bash
python -m http.server 80
```

> ##### Verify access to hosts from clusters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Verify access to External hosts from clusters
```

> Create Service, Endpoints, ServiceExport to access to test-vm, on cluster-a:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create Service, Endpoints, ServiceExport to access the test-vm from cluster-a:
```

    Note that we will use globalnet in this guide, therefore overlapping CIDRs are supported.
    One of the easiest way to create this environment will be to deploy two K3s clusters by the steps described
    [here](https://submariner.io/getting-started/quickstart/k3s/) until "Deploy cluster-b on node-b",
    with modifying deploy commands to just `curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | sh -` to use default CIDR.

### Setup Submariner

#### Ensure kubeconfig files

Ensure that kubeconfig file for cluster-a exists as kubeconfig.cluster-a and
kubeconfig file for cluster-b exists as kubeconfig.cluster-b on node of cluster-a.
File names can be different, but rest of this guide assumes these files are named as such.

#### Install `subctl` on node of cluster-a

{{% subctl-install %}}

#### Use cluster-a as the Broker with globalnet enabled

On node of cluster-a, run:

```bash
subctl deploy-broker --kubeconfig kubeconfig.cluster-a  --globalnet
```

#### Join cluster-a to the Broker with external CIDR added as clustercidr

Carefully review the `CLUSTER_CIDR` and `EXTERNAL_CIDR` and run:

```bash
CLUSTER_CIDR=10.42.0.0/24
EXTERNAL_CIDR=192.168.122.128/25

> subctl join --kubeconfig kubeconfig.cluster-a broker-info.subm --clusterid cluster-a --natt=false --clustercidr=${CLUSTER_CIDR},${EXTERNAL_CIDR}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subctl join --kubeconfig kubeconfig.cluster-a broker-info.subm --clusterid cluster-a --natt=false --external-network-cidr ${EXTERNAL_CIDR}
```

Reviewer 2: In the future we could have something like this, but still not implemented
